It's an awesome book too. And it's from a guy who's actually lived it.
Mm you know-hmm, <affirmative>, there's a lot of, you know,
there's a lot of wisdom in his life experiences that you,
you can get something out of. Um, I ask because you,
you obviously are a guy who seeks out knowledge mm-hmm <affirmative> right. You,
you, you work on your mind. What, what was it?
Was it a look or is this series of books? Like what,
what got you thinking differently?
Well, honestly, for me,
what got me thinking differently was honestly just going through the most trying
time of my life. I mean, I had just gotten married now. It's time to be a man.
Now it's time to step up. Now it's time to provide. And all of a sudden,
I go through this lost streak where after my third loss,
I went home to San Diego, with my wife.
We sat on the couch and we sit there and we just cried. Who was the third loss?
Uh, third loss was, will Brooks the second time. Oh, that's right. So, um,
so I lost him twice, Eddie once, and then now the,
the Madison square garden one, but we went home,
we sat there and it was almost like, what do we do now is beator gonna cut me.
And I did I work this hard to now, you know, be where I'm at now.
You know what I mean? I was at, I mean,
I was at two years or a year and a half removed from being one of the top three
guys in the world had just beaten Eddie, Eddie, and you know,
all that kind of stuff. And now here I was three fights in a row loss,
but it was, it was that time where I realized, right,
I was actually starting to change my kind of mental, uh,
tr training and stuff.
I was starting my mental training as I was going into that third fight. Um,
or that, that third loss, that second fight with will Brooks. Um,
but I just hadn't been there yet. And honestly that one,
that one was more just like I got caught, you know? Um, but that,
that was really what kind of set the trigger. And, and I re,
and I think I just started to realize Michael, why, you know, you,
you sit there and you tell the people, you wanna be the best. You, your,
your actions speak louder than your words.
You work harder than everybody else you show. At first,
you you're the last one to leave. You take care of your body,
you do all the right things. At the end of the day, somebody has to be the best.
Why shouldn't it be you? And I kept asking myself that question,
and the only answer I could come up with was I deserve to be the best.
I really do. You know, I, and I can say that with humility to say,
I really do deserve to be the best guy in the,
in the entire world at lightweight. Now, nobody works harder than I do.
Nobody takes care of themselves better than I do.
Nobody has made the sacrifices that I have and nobody lives the,
the clean lifestyle like I do and has,
has a calling on their life like I do yet when it came down to it,
it has taken years and years and decades to almost erase the small mindedness
that I've had in my past. Um, and we're all just a constant work in progress.
And I, and I think I just, I came up with work hard, good things might happen,
but most likely you'll be mediocre. You know, that's kind of,
that was kind of my mindset. Yeah. But what.
Did you do different? Like what, what did you change.
For me? Yeah. Reading books. Um, like what specifically.
Do you remember? Um, what triggered it? What, what.
Helped you? There's a, um, there was a, a book called mind. Jim,
have you ever heard of it? No mind, Jim. And they talked about, um,
he talks about making a mental highlight reel.
And since that day I've made mental highlight reels every couple months.
And even, even right now to this day,
there's on my mental highlight reel right now is beating Kyle sanderserson,
um,
at Mao on senior night when him and I were ranked at the same,
we were ranked like fourth and fifth in the country, you know?
And not that I wasn't supposed to beat him, but the manner in which I beat him,
I almost majored him.
And it was one of those breakthrough moments where I gave myself and in front of
everybody to just go out there and beat a guy handedly,
this is a wrestling match, and it was a wrestling match, you know? And so.
When you say, make a mental highlight real,
this is of your past accomplishments.
Past accomplishments. And I think the biggest detriment, the,
the biggest detriment to the people that work hard and expect a lot of
themselves is when you have achievements,
you don't take time to smell the roses.
You don't take time to pat yourself on the back. You fee, you think that, okay,
well, if I, if I, if I stop and I say, you know what? I am good. Oh my gosh,
I did do a great job. Holy cow. I was dominant.
You're not supposed to do that because that's prideful and that's, that's,
that's conceded and that's narcissistic, but really,
if you're not your biggest fan, who's gonna be, you know,
and I think that's what I did. I would accomplish something I'd say, okay, well,
I'm supposed to accomplish that. Right. I was, I won this tournament. Well,
I was supposed to, you.
Were raise, but there's a balance, right?
There's a balance between pating yourself on the back too much and kissing your
own and believing your own. And we see what happens with those guys.
<affirmative>, that's.
Almost worse. Exactly. Well, and I, and I think,
and I think we've all seen those cases too. Yeah.
We've all seen those cases where, or you see,
you see one guy pride comes before the fall, and then all of a sudden,
the fall happens. You say, okay, well, I don't wanna do that. Right.
But there is that fine line that, that middle ground where it's like, I,
I it's okay to love yourself. Right.
It's okay to look at yourself in the mirror and say that man, right there,
standing in front of me in the mirror is a badass. And you are,
you deserve to be extremely successful.
But then when you go out in the world that you don't walk around,
like you're better than people you don't walk around. Like, you know, so I mean,
there's, there is no, you know,
finite a plus B equal C type of way to live.
But there is that middle ground between being your biggest fan,
taking time to stop,
stop and pet yourself on the back and re realize your accomplishments,
which the highlight real thing is something great.
Cuz you can go through 10 things in your past.
And just continuing to remember those times where you,
you were in your flow state,
where you absolutely performed at a ridiculous level, that you didn't,
that you kind of surprised yourself almost.
And I think that continues to happen step by step in brick, by boring brick,
you make these little bitty accomplishments.
And as long as you continue to remember them,
you can continue to increase that confident capacity that you have that you
should have. And, and start to go from, man. I didn't know. I,
I was capable of this to now the confident expectancy of okay. I, I,
I said I deserve it, but now I really am starting to believe that I deserve it.
And then once you actually believe,
then you get in those scenarios where it's you just him and someone's gotta win.
So it's you more, most of the time now, so this flow.
State thing.
So like when you are in a state where you feel like everything is just
clicking mm-hmm <affirmative> do you try to,
how do you try to recreate that in your mind to remember that state?
I think it's, I think it, it is writing things down after a practice or,
or honestly, sometimes what I like to do is do, do you do that?
You like have a journal, a training journal.
Yeah. Try to write things down. I mean, and, and that's,
that's things too that can be added to a mental highlight reel, you know,
like going,
like having a really great sparring day and then remembering what you had for
breakfast. Remember and how you're your day start.
I remember whether you did or did not watch TV before practice or you know,
those little things. And then,
and then I always talk about working extremely hard and surround yourself with
the best people possible. And that's why I've, you know,
I moved out to Las Vegas, right?
When I started fighting and then moved to San Diego and then moved and then
moved my training camp to Arizona and then now Florida and now,
so I've moved all over the country to find the best guys I possibly can.
So when you have a great day like that, sit down with the coaches and say,
Hey coach, you know, talking to Henry or Evan or come, or,
or one of these guys that is coaching me right now and talk about it.
Like almost overly talk about it,
which that those guys are always annoying to me. Or they always used to be like,
Hey, I did this right. And I did this right. And did this right.
As I always thought, well, you should just work. You shouldn't talk, just work.
Right. But you get,
I I've started to realize that those things need to be vocalized or they get
swept under the rug. And you forget that you had a great day.
So now we sit down and we talk and we say, Hey man, that, that three,
two was really, really working great off the faint. And we worked that,
we worked that yesterday as we were hitting MITs.
And now you're continuing to show yourself that this thing really actually does
work. You're not just working to work, you're working smart. And then you see,
you see that working smart actually turns into results. And then you're, you're,
you're, you're like a lab rat in the gym,
working on these little experiments that you're, that you're making.
And you're actually collecting the data and seeing the results. Now, when.
You're talking about a mental highlight real thing, is this sort of a,
a rebuilding exercise, a rebuilding confidence exercise,
or is this just a solidifying skillset and understanding your
potential, cuz you've already done things before, like,
because you were in a bad spot. Yeah.
When you started doing this mm-hmm <affirmative> and you,
is this when you started constructing this highlight real thing. That's.
What, yeah. That's when it that's when I really, I actually read the book in,
in college and then found it on my shelf one day.
Do you know who wrote it? Mind Jim. Gary. Oh, see you find it. Jimmy.
Me Gary ack, Gary Mack.
Gary M macpowerful for Gary Mac. Yeah. And then there was just a bunch of,
and there was another book, um,
don't remind or remind me it's called how champions think. Um, but,
and it was just bunch of a bunch of instances where they would talk about tiger
woods. They would talk about this guy or that guy mm-hmm, you know,
and then one of the chapters was doing a mental highlight real and I think it
can be used for both. I mean, no, like, I mean, you should do one today.
We should all do one today. Whether you're in a great place,
whether you're just,
you just close the biggest business deal you ever possibly could,
or you just are down in the dumps because you feel like the biggest loser on or
earth,
you do a mental highlight reel to just it's it's just like going to the gym and
then it changes. You know, maybe, maybe this month is different than next month.
Maybe you,
you wipe off an old one and you put on a brand new one that you just remembered.
Because sometimes we forget successes that we have, it takes,
it takes me going to my Wikipedia page or me, you know,
going on some old interviews or, or somebody telling me on Twitter. Hey,
remember that time you did this for me to actually remember the successes that
I've had, because I've been conditioned to pull myself up by my boots,
bootstraps every single day and forget about all my accomplishes in my past.
Cuz those don't matter. Those are stumbling.
Those what I use used to look at stumbling blocks because what got you here,
isn't gonna get you where, where you want to go.
And we have that some sort of that, that mentality.
But you have to take the time to remember and almost look at yourself the way
other people see you, because we all are our, our, all our biggest critics,
you know, the way my fans see me, the way you watch me fight is, and, and the,
the way you see my abilities,
it's probably even better than I have seen myself a lot in my past from an
outside perspective. Right?
It's so much easier to look at someone outside perspective because our own inner
monologue or our own and, and our own selfim image,
dumies down who we are and, and how much we want to accomplish. Not all of us.
I mean, there's a lot of people out there who are cocky.
Narciss sit to narcissistic people who think they are the, you know, those.
People have the hardest time coming back from losses though. Big time. Yeah.
It seems like when they get head kicked or something and,
and then they realize they're human. Yeah. It's like, whoa,
you see it with a lot of those guys where yeah. They don't,
instead of facing their demons, what they've done is create this delusional,
delusional self-image mm-hmm <affirmative>.
And when that delusional self-image gets shattered and it's an undeniable
reality that there's people that are better than them. It's very,
very difficult for them to bounce back.
Yeah. Well, and I mean, I think I, I am by no means the poster child for,
for that. I mean, it,
it took me a loss that carried me into another loss and another loss. It was a,
I went 688 days without a win, never. But when I write a book, some days,
some days it's gonna be called 688 days.
And that's how long it took me to go from loss to win. And that's a long time.
That's a long, time's a long time to be,
to question yourself every single day to wake up in the morning.
Wondering if you were gonna have a paycheck,
wondering if you were gonna get a phone call from your manager,
wondering if you really wanted to open up your phone and see all the
negative comments that I told you,
Michael Chandler wasn't as good as we all thought he was, oh, you,
I can't believe. I believe <laugh>. You can't hate that dude. You know,
but I mean, not even, you know, not even just the fans, it was, you know,
the media wrote me off and, and, and everybody, you, you know, the you're,
you're just, you get written off and, and it, it,
it shapes the reality when really the reality was, man, I,
I was put on this earth to do some great things, but it just took me. I look,
I look at it now. And I think, you know, if bad things happen to you,
but a good things come, a good thing comes from it. Wasn't really a bad thing.
And I look at it and I say, everybody's got losses. It's not a big deal.
You know, I remember the sting. I remember the pain.
I remember the embarrassment. I mean, what we also REM gotta remember too,
is this is embarrassing. You lose a fight. That's embarrassing. You know,
it's a hard pill to swallow. Yeah. You know, so it's, it's tough.
Especially when you were a former champion and then you're going these 600 plus
days without a, a win. And that's,
it really highlights the difficult nature of fighting as opposed to any other
sport where, you know, there's,
there's times where it's entirely likely that you're gonna
go a long time without competing again. Yeah.
You could go six months without competing again. You can go eight months, guys,
go a year. If you get a injured. Yeah. That's a long time. Any other sport,
if you lose a baseball game, you know, you drop a ball. Yeah.
Like you're back at it next.
Day. The next day. Same thing with wrestling. Yeah. You know, wrestling,
wrestling was great because you know, you, you lost,
you lost a match on Saturday. You were able to,
to come back in the dual on Wednesday or even the next Saturday,
seven days you had to go <affirmative>, you know, I mean a lot of times, yeah.
I mean, barring injuries or what whatnot. I mean,
it could be a year before you get to get to step back in the cage again.
And then every single day you spend questioning and every single day,
you also just end up putting so much pressure on yourself. I mean, my,
the biggest thing that I did wrong was I came into this sport. I wasn't,
and literally the 18 months after guarding the sport,
I was in a cage with Eddie Alvarez, top five guy in the world,
beat Eddie Alvarez. Then it was like, okay, now you have to perform. That.
Was that soon after starting the sport.
Yeah. Uh, August of 2009, I had my first fight.
And then I fought him in 2011. That's.
Crazy. Yeah. And you finished him.
And finished him, but, but then, but then now the, the,
now the real game starts now. It's like, okay, Hey, you're there,
you're ranked in the top three, top five. You know,
your whole future depends on every single fight.
And then instead of think about every single fight,
you think about every single practice.
And instead of think about every single practice,
you think about every single round in practice and not, not just every round,
but every minute in practice. So you hit me with a, you hit me with a one,
two immediately. That's the loss in my mind.
So now I have to come back and get it. You know?
So instead of just focusing on success, I was focusing on perfection.
So every single day I was trying to be perfect and you can't be perfect. Mm.
The greatest athletes in the world will tell you, they are not perfect.
You know, they fail time and time and time again.
But I put all this pressure on myself to where I put myself up in this prison of
Michael, you suck because you just lost to this guy.
Who's not even signed to any organization at all. And you just lost to him in,
in this, in this sparring round. And my, my view of,
of what the loss was was different than my coach who watched it. He said, no,
you did all right. You didn't lose horribly. But in my mind, I lost horribly.
I would've got finished, blah, blah, blah. The kind of like crazy stuff,
you know? Um, so that's the thing too,
is I started focusing on success and not perfection, you know,
stop putting so much pressure in yourself to be perfect.
Just focus on being successful.
Now I'm focusing on the big picture of being successful instead of these little
bitty instances where I'm trying to be perfect.
Now, when you look at yourself and you look at your overall MMA skillset,
do you, uh,
do you try to look at it all almost like as if you're managing yourself,
not managing yourself, like a fight manager mm-hmm <affirmative> but like,
like a project. Yeah. Like looking at it like, okay,
this is what we need to work on. This is how I need to tighten this up.
And ti do you, do you look at it as like an overall long term project?
Like how do you, how do you.
Visualize it? Yeah, I mean, and, and I,
and I get that question a lot too is like, well, Hey, how much, how much,
how do you prepare for an opponent? And honestly,
I'd say almost 90% of my training is focusing on myself. I mean, because if I,
if I put the right systems in place, if I get the right still skill sets,
as sharp as they can be fight night,
there's not a guy in the lightweight division in the entire world that I think
can beat me.